.TH KESHA 1 "May 2026" "kesha 1.18.4" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kesha \- open-source local voice toolkit
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kesha
[OPTIONS] AUDIO_FILE...
.br
.B kesha
COMMAND [OPTIONS]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Kesha Voice Kit is a local speech-to-text and text-to-speech toolkit with a Bun TypeScript CLI and a Rust engine.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B completions
Print shell completion script for bash, zsh, or fish
.TP
.B doctor
Collect support diagnostics without changing local state
.TP
.B install
Download inference engine and models
.TP
.B manpage
Print the kesha(1) manpage
.TP
.B record
Record microphone audio to a WAV file
.TP
.B say
Synthesize speech from text (TTS). Writes audio to stdout (or \-\-out file). Defaults to WAV; use \-\-format ogg\-opus for messenger\-ready voice notes.
.TP
.B stats
Manage local anonymous Kesha Stats
.TP
.B status
Show backend installation status
.TP
.B support-bundle
Create a redacted diagnostics archive for support
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output results as JSON
.TP
.B \-\-toon
Output results as TOON (compact, LLM\-friendly encoding of the same data as \-\-json)
.TP
.B \-\-timestamps
Include timestamped transcript segments in JSON/TOON output
.TP
.B \-\-speakers
Include speaker labels in transcript segments. Requires \-\-json / \-\-toon / \-\-format json. Implies \-\-timestamps. Currently darwin\-arm64 only (#199).
.TP
.B \-\-include\-errors
With \-\-json, output { results, errors } so scripts can read per\-file failures without parsing stderr
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Show language detection details
.TP
.B \-\-format
Output format: transcript | json | toon (long\-form alias for \-\-json / \-\-toon)
.TP
.B \-\-lang
Expected language code (ISO 639\-1), warn if mismatch
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Trace engine subprocess calls on stderr (or KESHA_DEBUG=1)
.TP
.B \-\-vad
Force Silero VAD preprocessing (kesha install \-\-vad first). Without this, VAD auto\-engages on audio ≥ 120s.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-vad
Force full\-file ASR for short/medium files; long audio fails early
.SH SUBCOMMAND OPTIONS
.SS doctor
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output diagnostics as JSON
.TP
.B \-\-redact
Redact secrets and user\-home paths from diagnostic output
.SS install
.TP
.B \-\-coreml
Force CoreML backend (macOS arm64)
.TP
.B \-\-onnx
Force ONNX backend
.TP
.B \-\-no\-cache
Re\-download even if cached
.TP
.B \-\-plan
Show download, disk, and warm\-up plan without changing local state
.TP
.B \-\-tts
Also install TTS models (Kokoro EN + Vosk\-TTS RU, ~990MB)
.TP
.B \-\-vad
Also install Silero VAD (~2.3MB) for long\-audio preprocessing
.TP
.B \-\-diarize
Also install the Sortformer streaming\-diarization model (~245MB, darwin\-arm64 only — #199)
.SS record
.TP
.B \-\-out
Write recorded WAV audio to this path
.TP
.B \-\-max\-seconds
Maximum recording duration in seconds
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Trace engine subprocess calls on stderr (or KESHA_DEBUG=1)
.SS say
.TP
.B \-\-voice
Voice id, e.g. en\-am_michael
.TP
.B \-\-lang
BCP 47 language code (default en\-us)
.TP
.B \-\-out
Write audio to file instead of stdout
.TP
.B \-\-rate
Speaking rate 0.5–2.0
.TP
.B \-\-list\-voices
List installed voices and exit
.TP
.B \-\-ssml
Parse input as SSML (supports <speak>, <break>; strips unknown tags)
.TP
.B \-\-format
Output format: wav (default) or ogg\-opus (Telegram\-ready voice note). Inferred from \-\-out extension when omitted.
.TP
.B \-\-bitrate
Opus bitrate in bits/sec (e.g. 32000). Only with \-\-format ogg\-opus.
.TP
.B \-\-sample\-rate
Opus encoder sample rate (8000/12000/16000/24000/48000). Only with \-\-format ogg\-opus.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-expand\-abbrev
Disable Russian acronym auto\-expansion (ВОЗ → 'вэ о зэ') for ru\-vosk\-* voices. <say\-as interpret\-as='characters'> still works. Applies to Russian (ru\-vosk\-*) and English (en\-*) voices.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Log TTS synthesis time to stderr
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Trace engine subprocess calls on stderr (or KESHA_DEBUG=1)
.SS stats
.TP
.B \-\-format
Export format: json | csv
.SS status
.TP
.B \-\-disk
Include recursive cache disk usage
.SS support-bundle
.TP
.B \-\-output
Write archive to this .tar.gz path
.SH FILES
.TP
.B completions/kesha.bash
Bash completion script included in the npm package.
.TP
.B completions/kesha.zsh
Zsh completion script included in the npm package.
.TP
.B completions/kesha.fish
Fish completion script included in the npm package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bun (1)
